improve chain derivation documentation (#8139)
ethereum-optimism/optimism: specs/derivation.md

> **Note** the following assumes a single sequencer and batcher. In the future, the design will be adapted to
> accommodate multiple such entities.

[L2 chain derivation][g-derivation] — deriving L2 [blocks][g-block] from L1 data — is one of the main responsibilities of
the [rollup node][g-rollup-node], both in validator mode, and in sequencer mode (where derivation acts as a sanity check
on sequencing, and enables detecting L1 chain [re-organizations][g-reorg]).

The L2 chain is derived from the L1 chain. In particular, each L1 block following [L2 chain
inception][g-l2-chain-inception] is mapped to a [sequencing epoch][g-sequencing-epoch] comprising

> multiple L2 blocks. Each L2 block belongs to exactly one epoch, and we call the corresponding L1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
at least one L2 block. Each L2 block belongs to exactly one epoch, and we call the corresponding L1
```
Typically multiple, but not strictly

block its [L1 origin][l1-origin]. The epoch's number equals that of its L1 origin block.

To derive the L2 blocks of epoch number `E`, we need the following inputs:

- L1 blocks in the range `[E, E + SWS)`, called the [sequencing window][g-sequencing-window] of the epoch, and `SWS`
  the sequencing window size. (Note that sequencing windows overlap.)
- [Batcher transactions][g-batcher-transaction] from blocks in the sequencing window.
  - These transactions allow us to reconstruct the epoch's [sequencer batches][g-sequencer-batch], each of

>     which will produce one L2 block. Note that:

Reviewer 2: I think after SpanBatch, a batch can be used to build one or more blocks

Reviewer: That is correct. We will need to draw the distinction between a singular batch and a span batch here. A second thing that I'm thinking of is that we should figure out how span batches relate the the more complex but rarely hit batch rules.

Author: Do we want to update this now or wait until span batches are live? (I suspect there will be more edits than this to cover span batches).

Reviewer: Span batches are spec'd, so we should start on this, but it should be part of a separate PR.

      each batch [must contain](#batch-format) the L1 origin hash.
    - An epoch may have no sequencer batches.
- [Deposits][g-deposits] made in the L1 origin (in the form of events emitted by the [deposit
  contract][g-deposit-contract]).
- L1 block attributes from the L1 origin (to derive the [L1 attributes deposited transaction][g-l1-attr-deposit]).
- The state of the L2 chain after the last L2 block of the previous epoch, or the [L2 genesis state][g-l2-genesis]
  if `E` is the first epoch.

To derive the whole L2 chain from scratch, we start with the [L2 genesis state][g-l2-genesis] and
the [L2 genesis block] as the first L2 block. We then derive L2 blocks from each epoch in order,
starting at the first L1 block following [L2 chain inception][g-l2-chain-inception]. Refer to the
[Architecture section][architecture] for more information on how we implement this in practice.
The L2 chain may contain pre-Bedrock history, but the L2 genesis here refers to the Bedrock L2
genesis block.

Each L2 `block` with origin `l1_origin` is subject to the following constraints (whose values
are denominated in seconds):

- `block.timestamp = prev_l2_timestamp + l2_block_time`

>   - `prev_l2_timestamp` is the timestamp of the L2 block immediately preceeding this one, or

Reviewer: the block's timestamp is always `prev_l2_timestamp + l2_block_time`. The rules around what a valid L1 origin relate the various L1 and L2 timestamps together.

Author: ack. any edits you'd like here to further clarify?

Reviewer: The part "or  `l1_origin.timestamp` if this is the first L2 block in the first epoch." is incorrect.

Author: Ah of course: updated the text to clarify that the genesis block timestamp is explicitly provided.
